doc: Add release notes for the 2.9.0 release (#19240)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases_and_maturity/releases/release-notes-2.9.0.rst

* `Modem firmware compatibility matrix for the nRF9160 DK`_

Use the latest version of the `Programmer app`_ of `nRF Connect for Desktop`_ to update the modem firmware.
See :ref:`nrf9160_gs_updating_fw_modem` for instructions.

Modem-related libraries and versions
====================================

.. list-table:: Modem-related libraries and versions
   :widths: 15 10
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Library name
     - Version information
   * - Modem library
     - `Changelog <Modem library changelog for v2.9.0_>`_
   * - LwM2M carrier library
     - `Changelog <LwM2M carrier library changelog for v2.9.0_>`_

Known issues
************

Known issues are only tracked for the latest official release.
See `known issues for nRF Connect SDK v2.9.0`_ for the list of issues valid for the latest release.

Migration notes
***************

See the `Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v2.9.0`_ for the changes required or recommended when migrating your application from |NCS| v2.8.0 to |NCS| v2.9.0.

.. _ncs_release_notes_290_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE, OS, and tool support
=========================

> * Added Nordic Thingy:91 X to the list of devices supported by the `Quick Start app`_ on the :ref:`gsg_guides` page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added support for Nordic Thingy:91 X to the `Quick Start app`_. 
  The list on the :ref:`gsg_guides` page is updated accordingly.
```

  * Dynamic SIT LIT switching support that allows the application to switch between these modes, as long as the requirements for these modes are met.
    You can enable this using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_ICD_DSLS_SUPPORT` Kconfig option.
  * The Kconfig option :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_ICD_SIT_SLOW_POLL_LIMIT` to limit the slow polling interval value for the device while it is in the SIT mode.
    You can use this to limit the slow poll interval for the ICD LIT device while it is temporarily working in the SIT mode.
  * New device types:

    * Water heater
    * Solar power
    * Battery storage
    * Heat pump
    * Mounted on/off control
    * Mounted dimmable load control

* Updated:

  * Thermostat cluster with support for scheduling and preset modes, like vacation, and home or away settings.
  * Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) with support for user-defined charging preferences, like specifying the time when the car will be charged.
  * Occupancy sensing cluster with features like radar, vision, and ambient sensing.
  * Intermittently Connected Devices feature with enhancements for the Long Idle Time (LIT) and Check-In protocol.

>     With this enhancements, the state of this feature is changed from provisional to certifiable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    With these enhancements, the state of this feature is changed from provisional to certifiable.
```

Thread
------

* Added Kconfig options for configuring the MLE child update timeout, child supervision interval, and child supervision check timeout.

Zigbee
------

* Updated:

  * :ref:`nrfxlib:zboss` to v3.11.7.0 and platform v5.1.7 (``v3.11.6.0+5.1.7``).

>     They contain several fixes related to malfunctioning in heavy traffic environment and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    They contain several fixes related to malfunctioning in a heavy traffic environment and more.
```

    For details, see :ref:`zboss_changelog`.
  * The :ref:`ZBOSS Network Co-processor Host <ug_zigbee_tools_ncp_host>` package to the new version v2.2.5.

Wi-Fi
-----

* Updated the :ref:`wifi_regulatory_channel_rules` for some countries in the :ref:`ug_nrf70_developing_regulatory_support` documentation.

Applications
============

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`application <applications>`.

Asset Tracker v2
----------------

* Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 25 kB for an nRF91 Series DK and 12 kB for the Thingy:91 X.

Connectivity bridge
-------------------

* Updated the handling of USB CDC ACM baud rate requests to make sure the baud rate is set correctly when the host requests a change.
  This fixes an issue when using GNU screen with the Thingy:91 X.

Matter bridge
-------------

* Added:

  * Support for the ``UniqueID`` attribute in the Bridged Device Basic Information cluster.

>   * Version 2 of bridged device data scheme containing ``UniqueID``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Version 2 of the bridged device data scheme containing ``UniqueID``.
```

    * :ref:`zephyr:nrf54l15dk_nrf54l15`
    * :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20`

  * MCUboot bootloader configurations to enable the following Kconfig options:

    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` - Used to protect the bootloader partition against memory corruption.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HW_STACK_PROTECTION` - Used to protect against stack overflows.

    The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HW_STACK_PROTECTION` Kconfig option and its dependency (the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ARM_MPU` Kconfig option) might be disabled in case of targets with limited memory.

  * MCUboot bootloader configuration for the MCUboot SMP build type and the nRF52840 Gaming Mouse target to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ARM_MPU` Kconfig option that is required to enable hardware stack protection (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HW_STACK_PROTECTION`).

  * The nRF54L15 DK's configurations (``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l15/cpuapp``) to enable hardware cryptography for the MCUboot bootloader.
    The application image is verified using a pure ED25519 signature.
    The public key that MCUboot uses for validating the application image is securely stored in the hardware Key Management Unit (KMU).

>     The change increases the MCUboot partition size (modifies Partition Manager configuration) and changes the MCUboot image signing algorithm.
>     Because of that, the nRF Desktop application images built for an nRF54L15 DK from the |NCS| v2.9.0 are not compatible with MCUboot bootloader built from previous releases.
>     It is highly recommended to use hardware cryptography for nRF54L SoC Series for improved security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The change increases the MCUboot partition size (modifies the Partition Manager configuration) and changes the MCUboot image signing algorithm.
    Because of that, the nRF Desktop application images built for an nRF54L15 DK from the |NCS| v2.9.0 are not compatible with the MCUboot bootloader built from previous releases.
    It is highly recommended to use hardware cryptography for the nRF54L SoC Series for improved security.
```

    See the :ref:`nrf_desktop_bootloader` page for more details.

  * The :ref:`nrf_desktop_ble_conn_params` to:

    * Fix the Bluetooth LE connection parameters update loop (NCSDK-30261) that replicated if an nRF Desktop dongle without Low Latency Packet Mode (LLPM) support was connected to an nRF Desktop peripheral with LLPM support.
    * Wait until a triggered Bluetooth LE connection parameters update is completed before triggering subsequent updates for a given connection.

>     * Improve the log to display also the information if USB is suspended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Improve the log to also display the information if USB is suspended.
```

      * ``multiple_threads``

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

Wi-Fi drivers
-------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf70_wifi_tx_power_calculation` section to the :ref:`nrf70_wifi` page.

Libraries
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`library <libraries>`.

Binary libraries
----------------

* :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library:

  * Updated the :ref:`req_appln_limitations` page to clarify carrier-specific requirements.
    Added overlay files and documentation to :ref:`serial_lte_modem` application and :ref:`lwm2m_carrier` sample to guide in the correct usage of LwM2M carrier library for SoftBank and LG U+.

Bluetooth libraries and services
--------------------------------

* Added the :ref:`rreq_readme` and :ref:`rrsp_readme` libraries.

* :ref:`hogp_readme` library:

  * Updated the :c:func:`bt_hogp_rep_read` function to forward the GATT read error code through the registered user callback.
    This ensures that API user is aware of the error.

* :ref:`bt_fast_pair_readme` library:

  * Added support in build system for devices that do not support the :ref:`partition_manager`.

>     The :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target is the only example of such device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target is the only example of such a device.
```

The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Highlights
**********

Added the following features as supported:

* nRF54L Series:

  * FMN extension available for members of the Apple MFi program and Apple Find My.
  * `nRF54L10`_ and `nRF54L05`_ SoC support including emulated targets on the `nRF54L15 DK`_ including:
    * Protocol support on the nRF54L10 SoC for Bluetooth® LE, Amazon Sidewalk, :ref:`Thread 1.4 <thread_ug_supported_features_v14>`, and Matter over Thread.
    * Protocol support on the nRF54L05 SoC for Bluetooth LE and Thread 1.4.
    * All standard SoC peripherals.
    * :ref:`PSA Crypto APIs <ug_nrf54l_cryptography>` (hardware-accelerated) for cryptographic operations and key storage.

> * Bluetooth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Bluetooth:
```

  * :ref:`Parallel scanning and initiating connection <bt_scanning_while_connecting>`.
    It reduces the overall waiting time when there are several Bluetooth devices to be discovered and connected at the same time.

* Wi-Fi®:

  * Wi-Fi WPA3 Enterprise Security for legacy crypto on the nRF5340 SoC as a host in combination with nRF7002 or nRF7001 Wi-Fi 6 companion IC.

>   * Matter 1.4 enhancements:
> 
>     * Long Idle Time (LIT) protocol extending battery life for Matter over Thread devices.
>       This feature is showcased in the new :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample` sample.
>     * Check-in protocol ensuring reliable communication for low-power devices requiring LIT.
>     * Energy management - Support for new device types, such as solar panels, batteries, heat pumps, and water heaters, as well as improvements to Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) and thermostats.
>     * Occupancy sensing - Sensing features, such as radar vision and ambient sensing technologies.
>     * Two new device types (mounted On/Off and dimmable load control) designed specifically for fixed in-wall smart home devices that deliver power to wired devices.
> 
>     For more information, see the `CSA press release for Matter 1.4`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Matter 1.4 enhancements:

   * Long Idle Time (LIT) protocol extending battery life for Matter over Thread devices.
     This feature is showcased in the new :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample` sample.
   * Check-in protocol ensuring reliable communication for low-power devices requiring LIT.
   * Energy management - Support for new device types, such as solar panels, batteries, heat pumps, and water heaters, as well as improvements to Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) and thermostats.
   * Occupancy sensing - Sensing features, such as radar vision and ambient sensing technologies.
   * Two new device types (mounted On/Off and dimmable load control) designed specifically for fixed in-wall smart home devices that deliver power to wired devices.

   For more information, see the `CSA press release for Matter 1.4`_.
```

Added the following features as experimental:

> * Bluetooth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Bluetooth:
```

>   * :ref:`channel_sounding_ras_reflector` and :ref:`channel_sounding_ras_initiator` samples on the nRF54L15 DK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * :ref:`channel_sounding_ras_reflector` and :ref:`channel_sounding_ras_initiator` samples for the nRF54L15 DK.
```

  The build system uses an appropriate overlay file for each core, relying only on the ``-DSHIELD=nrf21540ek`` parameter.

Security
========

* Extended the ``west ncs-provision`` command so that different key lifetime policies can be selected.

Protocols
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`protocol <protocols>`.
See `Samples`_ for lists of changes for the protocol-related samples.

Amazon Sidewalk
---------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board target.

Bluetooth LE
-------------

* Added support for scanning and initiating at the same time.
  This was introduced in |NCS| 2.7.0 as experimental.
  The :ref:`bt_scanning_while_connecting` sample showcases how you can use this feature to reduce the time to establish connections to many devices.

Matter
------

* Added:

  * Implementation of the ``Spake2pVerifier`` class for the PSA crypto backend.
    You can use this class to generate the Spake2+ verifier at runtime.
    To use this class, enable the Kconfig options :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_PBKDF2_HMAC` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_SPAKE2P_KEY_PAIR_DERIVE`.

>   * The Matter watchdog pause mode to the :ref:`ug_matter_device_watchdog` feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * The :ref:`<ug_matter_device_watchdog_pause_mode>` to the :ref:`ug_matter_device_watchdog` feature.
```

Wi-Fi
-----

* Updated the :ref:`wifi_regulatory_channel_rules` for some countries in the :ref:`ug_nrf70_developing_regulatory_support` documentation.

Applications
============

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`application <applications>`.

Asset Tracker v2
----------------

* Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 25 kB for an nRF91 Series DK and 12 kB for the Thingy:91 X.

Connectivity bridge
-------------------

* Updated the handling of USB CDC ACM baud rate requests to make sure the baud rate is set correctly when the host requests a change.
  This fixes an issue when using GNU screen with the Thingy:91 X.

Matter bridge
-------------

* Added:

  * Support for the ``UniqueID`` attribute in the Bridged Device Basic Information cluster.
  * Version 2 of the bridged device data scheme containing ``UniqueID``.
  * Kconfig options :ref:`CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_PRE_2_7_0 <CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_PRE_2_7_0>` and :ref:`CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_VERSION_1 <CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_VERSION_1>` to enable migration from older data schemes.

nRF5340 Audio
-------------

> 

Reviewer 3: Please add:

* OCT-2304: Calculation in audio_datapath. num_blks_in_fifo now considers wrapping.
* OCT-3251: Fix for nRF Auraconfig. Data was only sent on last BIS if the SD card was not used.

Author: Aren't these known issues?

Author: And if just fixes, at least the nRF Auraconfig might better fit under Bluetooth samples.
The first one might be something like:
* Updated the calculation in ``audio_datapath.num_blks_in_fifo`` to consider wrapping.

Reviewer 3: They are resolved issues, if you want them here.
And yes, the Auraconfig should be under Bluetooth samples. My mistake.

Author: Updated now. First one under nRF5340 Audio and the other one under BT samples.

* Updated the documentation for :ref:`nrf53_audio_app_building` with cross-links and additional information, based on user feedback.

nRF Desktop
-----------

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`nrf_desktop_settings_loader` to make the :ref:`Zephyr Memory Storage (ZMS) <zephyr:zms_api>` the default settings backend for all board targets that use the MRAM technology.
    As a result, all :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` configurations were migrated from the NVS settings backend to the ZMS settings backend.

>   * The :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` release configuration to enable the :ref:`nrf_desktop_watchdog`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * :ref:`nrf_desktop_watchdog` by adding the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` release configuration.
```

----------------

* :ref:`dect_shell_application` sample:

  * Added:

    * The ``dect mac`` command.
      A brief MAC-level sample on top of DECT PHY interface with new commands to create a periodic cluster beacon, scan for it, associate or disassociate a PT/client, and send data to a FT/beacon random access window.
      This is not a full MAC implementation and not fully compliant with DECT NR+ MAC specification (`ETSI TS 103 636-4`_).
    * The ``startup_cmd`` command.
      This command is used to store shell commands to be run sequentially after bootup.
    * Band 4 support for nRF9151 with modem firmware v1.0.2.

  * Updated:

    * The ``dect rssi_scan`` command with busy/possible/free subslot count-based RSSI scan.
    * The ``dect rx`` command to provide the possibility to iterate all channels and to enable RX filter.

Edge Impulse samples
--------------------

* Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target in the following samples:

  * :ref:`ei_data_forwarder_sample`
  * :ref:`ei_wrapper_sample`

Matter samples
--------------

* Updated:

  * All Matter samples that support low-power mode to enable the :ref:`lib_ram_pwrdn` feature.

>     It is enabled by default for the release configuration of the :ref:`matter_lock_sample`, :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample`, :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample`, and :ref:`matter_window_covering_sample` samples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It is enabled by default for the release configuration of the following samples:
    
    * :ref:`matter_lock_sample`
    * :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample`
    * :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample`
    * :ref:`matter_window_covering_sample`
```

    Added overlay files and documentation to :ref:`serial_lte_modem` application and :ref:`lwm2m_carrier` sample to guide in the correct usage of LwM2M carrier library for SoftBank and LG U+.

Bluetooth libraries and services
--------------------------------

* Added the :ref:`rreq_readme` and :ref:`rrsp_readme` libraries.

* :ref:`hogp_readme` library:

  * Updated the :c:func:`bt_hogp_rep_read` function to forward the GATT read error code through the registered user callback.
    This ensures that API user is aware of the error.

Modem libraries
---------------

* :ref:`modem_key_mgmt` library:

  * Added the CME error code 527 - invalid content.
  * Updated to handle generic CME errors from all ``AT%CMNG`` commands.

nRF RPC libraries
-----------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf_rpc_dev_info` library for obtaining information about a device connected through the :ref:`nrfxlib:nrf_rpc`.

sdk-nrfxlib
-----------

See the changelog for each library in the :doc:`nrfxlib documentation <nrfxlib:README>` for additional information.

Scripts
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`script <scripts>`.

* :ref:`nrf_desktop_config_channel_script` Python script:

>   * Added support for pure ED25519 signature (used by nRF54L based devices that enable MCUboot hardware cryptography).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Added support for pure ED25519 signature (used by nRF54L-based devices that enable MCUboot hardware cryptography).
```

>   * Added the CME error code 527 - invalid content.
> 
>   * Updated to handle generic CME errors from all ``AT%CMNG`` commands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Added the CME error code 527 - invalid content.
  * Updated to handle generic CME errors from all ``AT%CMNG`` commands.
```

    This requires using ``imgtool`` supporting pure ED25519 signature that can be installed from ``sdk-mcuboot`` repository.

MCUboot
=======

> The MCUboot fork in |NCS| (``sdk-mcuboot``) contains all commits from the upstream MCUboot repository up to and including ``a4eda30f5b0cfd0cf15512be9dcd559239dbfc91``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

Reviewer 5: The upstream mcuboot SHA should be `e890df7ab975da181a9f3fb3abc470bf935625ab`, @nvlsianpu @nordicjm please double check.

Author: Updated.

The Zephyr fork in |NCS| (``sdk-zephyr``) contains all commits from the upstream Zephyr repository up to and including ``beb733919d8d64a778a11bd5e7d5cbe5ae27b8ee``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

For the list of upstream Zephyr commits (not including cherry-picked commits) incorporated into nRF Connect SDK since the most recent release, run the following command from the :file:`ncs/zephyr` repository (after running ``west update``):

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline beb733919d ^ea02b93eea

For the list of |NCS| specific commits, including commits cherry-picked from upstream, run:

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline manifest-rev ^beb733919d

The current |NCS| main branch is based on revision ``beb733919d`` of Zephyr.

.. note::
   For possible breaking changes and changes between the latest Zephyr release and the current Zephyr version, refer to the :ref:`Zephyr release notes <zephyr_release_notes>`.

Documentation
=============

* Added:

  * The :ref:`matter_samples_config` page that documents Kconfig options and snippets shared by Matter samples and applications.
  * A page about :ref:`add_new_driver`.
  * A page for the :ref:`sdp_gpio` application.

> * Updated the structure and contents of :ref:`config_gpio_pin` with more detailed information.

Reviewer: This is rendered as a Kconfig option in the PR preview. The solution to this would be to add a new label on the "Driving a GPIO pin directly" page that doesn't start with "config_", and provide that as ref here.
Not sure, if this is just for the developer docs (PR preview) or same is seen in the Zoomin docs as well.

Author: Trying :ref:`Driving a GPIO pin directly <config_gpio_pin>`

Reviewer 2: I think the label in the source document need to be modified into something like gpio_pin_config and that label should be used here.

Author: Looks like that. Luckily, the label has not been used anywhere yet. Will change the label.

Board support
=============

* Updated various tests and samples to use Zephyr's :ref:`native simulator <zephyr:native_sim>` instead of Zephyr's :ref:`native POSIX <zephyr:native_posix>` for :ref:`running_unit_tests`.
  This mirrors the deprecation of ``native_posix`` in Zephyr.
  Support for ``native_posix`` will be removed in Zephyr with the v4.2 release.
  In the |NCS|, it will be removed once Zephyr v4.2 is upmerged to sdk-nrf.

Build and configuration system
==============================

* Fixed the issue in the ``nordic-bt-rpc`` snippet, where an invalid memory map was created for nRF54H20 devices, which resulted in a runtime failure.

Bootloaders and DFU
===================

* Updated the allowed offset for :ref:`doc_fw_info` in the :ref:`bootloader`.
  It can now be placed at offset ``0x600``.
  However, you cannot use it for any applications with |NSIB| compiled before this change.

Developing with nRF91 Series
============================

* Moved the Thingy:91 and Thingy:91 X guides to new sections, :ref:`thingy91_ug_intro` and :ref:`ug_thingy91x` respectively, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.

Developing with nRF54L Series
=============================

> * Added the :ref:`nRF54l_signing_app_with_flpr_payload` page that includes instructions for building separate applications, merging them, and signing them for MCUboot.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Added:

  * The :ref:`nRF54l_signing_app_with_flpr_payload` page that includes instructions for building separate applications, merging them, and signing them for MCUboot.
  * The :ref:`ug_nrf54l_developing_basics_kmu` page explaining basic concepts and recommendations. 
```

.. _ncs_release_notes_290_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE, OS, and tool support
=========================

* Added support for the Nordic Thingy:91 X to the `Quick Start app`_.
  The list on the :ref:`gsg_guides` page is updated accordingly.

* Updated the deprecation notes for `nRF Command Line Tools`_ added in the previous release.
  The notes now clearly state the tools will be archived, no updates will be made to the software, but it will still be available for download.

Board support
=============

* Updated various tests and samples to use Zephyr's :ref:`native simulator <zephyr:native_sim>` instead of Zephyr's :ref:`native POSIX <zephyr:native_posix>` for :ref:`running_unit_tests`.
  This mirrors the deprecation of ``native_posix`` in Zephyr.
  Support for ``native_posix`` will be removed in Zephyr with the v4.2 release.
  In the |NCS|, it will be removed once Zephyr v4.2 is upmerged to sdk-nrf.

Build and configuration system
==============================

> * Fixed the issue in the ``nordic-bt-rpc`` snippet, where an invalid memory map was created for nRF54H20 devices, which resulted in a runtime failure.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`application <applications>`.

Asset Tracker v2
----------------

* Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 25 kB for an nRF91 Series DK and 12 kB for the Thingy:91 X.

Connectivity bridge
-------------------

* Updated the handling of USB CDC ACM baud rate requests to make sure the baud rate is set correctly when the host requests a change.
  This fixes an issue when using GNU screen with the Thingy:91 X.

Matter bridge
-------------

* Added:

  * Support for the ``UniqueID`` attribute in the Bridged Device Basic Information cluster.
  * Version 2 of the bridged device data scheme containing ``UniqueID``.
  * Kconfig options :ref:`CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_PRE_2_7_0 <CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_PRE_2_7_0>` and :ref:`CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_VERSION_1 <CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_VERSION_1>` to enable migration from older data schemes.

nRF5340 Audio
-------------

* Updated:

  * The documentation for :ref:`nrf53_audio_app_building` with cross-links and additional information, based on user feedback.
  * The calculation in ``audio_datapath.num_blks_in_fifo`` to consider wrapping.

nRF Desktop
-----------

* Updated:

>   * The :ref:`nrf_desktop_settings_loader` to make the :ref:`Zephyr Memory Storage (ZMS) <zephyr:zms_api>` the default settings backend for all board targets that use the MRAM technology.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

    As a result, all :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` configurations were migrated from the NVS settings backend to the ZMS settings backend.

>   * :ref:`nrf_desktop_watchdog` by adding the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` release configuration.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

  * The :ref:`channel_sounding_ras_initiator` sample demonstrating Channel Sounding by setting up a Channel Sounding Initiator that acts as a Ranging Requestor GATT Client.
    It includes a basic distance estimation to demonstrate IQ data handling.
    The accuracy is not representative for Channel Sounding and should be replaced if accuracy is important.
  * The :ref:`bt_peripheral_with_multiple_identities` sample demonstrating how to use a single physical device to create and manage multiple advertisers, making it appear as multiple distinct devices by assigning each a unique identity.
  * The :ref:`bt_scanning_while_connecting` sample demonstrating how to establish multiple connections faster using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_SCAN_AND_INITIATE_IN_PARALLEL` Kconfig option.
  * Support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board targets in the following samples:

    * :ref:`direct_test_mode`
    * :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse`
    * :ref:`peripheral_lbs`
    * :ref:`power_profiling`
    * :ref:`peripheral_uart`

> * Updated:

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, probably this entire entry  should be moved back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

Author: Kepth in both.

  * Configurations of the following Bluetooth samples to make the :ref:`Zephyr Memory Storage (ZMS) <zephyr:zms_api>` the default settings backend for all board targets that use the MRAM technology:

      * :ref:`bluetooth_central_hids`
      * :ref:`peripheral_hids_keyboard`
      * :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse`
      * :ref:`central_and_peripheral_hrs`
      * :ref:`central_bas`
      * :ref:`central_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`central_uart`
      * :ref:`peripheral_bms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cgms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cts_client`
      * :ref:`peripheral_lbs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_mds`
      * :ref:`peripheral_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`power_profiling`
      * :ref:`peripheral_rscs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_status`
      * :ref:`peripheral_uart`
      * :ref:`ble_rpc_host`

>     As a result, all :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` configurations of the affected samples were migrated from the NVS settings backend to the ZMS settings backend.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

  * Testing steps in the :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse` to provide the build configuration that is compatible with the `Bluetooth Low Energy app`_ testing tool.

* :ref:`power_profiling` sample:

  * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.

* :ref:`nrf_auraconfig` sample:

  * Fixed the data sending (OCT-3251).
    Data is now sent on all BISes when generated by the application (no SD card inserted).

Bluetooth Fast Pair samples
---------------------------

* :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag` sample:

  * Updated the MCUboot bootloader configuration for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54l15dk_nrf54l15` board target to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` Kconfig option that is used to protect the bootloader partition against memory corruption.

* :ref:`fast_pair_input_device` sample:

>   * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

      This is not a full MAC implementation and not fully compliant with DECT NR+ MAC specification (`ETSI TS 103 636-4`_).
    * The ``startup_cmd`` command.
      This command is used to store shell commands to be run sequentially after bootup.
    * Band 4 support for nRF9151 with modem firmware v1.0.2.

  * Updated:

    * The ``dect rssi_scan`` command with busy/possible/free subslot count-based RSSI scan.
    * The ``dect rx`` command to provide the possibility to iterate all channels and to enable RX filter.

Edge Impulse samples
--------------------

* Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target in the following samples:

  * :ref:`ei_data_forwarder_sample`
  * :ref:`ei_wrapper_sample`

Matter samples
--------------

* Updated:

  * All Matter samples that support low-power mode to enable the :ref:`lib_ram_pwrdn` feature.
    It is enabled by default for the release configuration of the following samples:

    * :ref:`matter_lock_sample`
    * :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample`
    * :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample`
    * :ref:`matter_window_covering_sample`

>   * All Matter samples to enable the ZMS file subsystem in all devices that contain MRAM, such as the nRF54H Series devices.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please duplicate (if it involves other devices too) this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

* :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample` sample:

  * Added:

    * Support for ICD dynamic SIT LIT switching (DSLS).
    * Support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board target.

Peripheral samples
------------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board targets in the :ref:`radio_test` sample.

Protocol serialization samples
------------------------------

* Updated GPIO pins on the nRF54L15 DK used for communication between the client and server over UART.
  One of the previously selected pins was also used to drive an LED, which may have disrupted the UART communication.

Thread samples
--------------

* Removed support for the ``nrf5340dk/nrf5340/cpuapp/ns`` board target for all samples.

* :ref:`ot_cli_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board target.

* :ref:`ot_coprocessor_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp`` board targets.

Other samples
-------------

* :ref:`coremark_sample` sample:

  * Updated:

>     * Configuration for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board to support multi-domain logging using the ARM Coresight STM.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

      * ``flash_and_run``
      * ``heap_memory``
      * ``static_memory``
      * ``multiple_threads``

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

Wi-Fi drivers
-------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf70_wifi_tx_power_calculation` section to the :ref:`nrf70_wifi` page.

Libraries
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`library <libraries>`.

Binary libraries
----------------

* :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library:

  * Updated the :ref:`req_appln_limitations` page to clarify carrier-specific requirements.
    Added overlay files and documentation to :ref:`serial_lte_modem` application and :ref:`lwm2m_carrier` sample to guide in the correct usage of LwM2M carrier library for SoftBank and LG U+.

Bluetooth libraries and services
--------------------------------

* Added the :ref:`rreq_readme` and :ref:`rrsp_readme` libraries.

* :ref:`hogp_readme` library:

  * Updated the :c:func:`bt_hogp_rep_read` function to forward the GATT read error code through the registered user callback.
    This ensures that API user is aware of the error.

* :ref:`bt_fast_pair_readme` library:

>   * Added support in build system for devices that do not support the :ref:`partition_manager`.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

    * The logging format in the standard logging mode to align it with the format used in the multi-domain logging mode.
    * Support for alternative configurations to use the :ref:`file suffix feature from Zephyr <app_build_file_suffixes>`.
      The following file suffixes are supported as alternative configurations:

      * ``flash_and_run``
      * ``heap_memory``
      * ``static_memory``
      * ``multiple_threads``

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

|no_changes_yet_note|

Wi-Fi drivers
-------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf70_wifi_tx_power_calculation` section to the :ref:`nrf70_wifi` page.

Libraries
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`library <libraries>`.

Binary libraries
----------------

* :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library:

  * Updated the :ref:`req_appln_limitations` page to clarify carrier-specific requirements.
    Added overlay files and documentation to :ref:`serial_lte_modem` application and :ref:`lwm2m_carrier` sample to guide in the correct usage of LwM2M carrier library for SoftBank and LG U+.

Bluetooth libraries and services
--------------------------------

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* Added the :ref:`rreq_readme` and :ref:`rrsp_readme` libraries.
```
Please add this for #19230

|no_changes_yet_note|

Debug libraries
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

DFU libraries
-------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Gazell libraries
----------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Security libraries
------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Modem libraries
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Multiprotocol Service Layer libraries
-------------------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Libraries for networking
------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Libraries for NFC
-----------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

nRF RPC libraries
-----------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf_rpc_dev_info` library for obtaining information about a device connected through the :ref:`nrfxlib:nrf_rpc`.

Other libraries
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Security libraries
------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Shell libraries
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Libraries for Zigbee
--------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

sdk-nrfxlib
-----------

See the changelog for each library in the :doc:`nrfxlib documentation <nrfxlib:README>` for additional information.

Scripts
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`script <scripts>`.

> 
> * Added semantic version support to :ref:`nrf_desktop_config_channel_script` Python script for devices that use the SUIT DFU.

Reviewer 9: This changelog entry is already part of the NCS 2.8. Please remove the following

```suggestion
```

      * :ref:`peripheral_bms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cgms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cts_client`
      * :ref:`peripheral_lbs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_mds`
      * :ref:`peripheral_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`power_profiling`
      * :ref:`peripheral_rscs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_status`
      * :ref:`peripheral_uart`
      * :ref:`ble_rpc_host`

    As a result, all :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` configurations of the affected samples were migrated from the NVS settings backend to the ZMS settings backend.
  * Testing steps in the :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse` to provide the build configuration that is compatible with the `Bluetooth Low Energy app`_ testing tool.

  * :ref:`power_profiling` sample that now has added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.

Bluetooth Fast Pair samples
---------------------------

* :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag` sample:

  * Updated the MCUboot bootloader configuration for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54l15dk_nrf54l15` board target to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` Kconfig option that is used to protect the bootloader partition against memory corruption.

Bluetooth Mesh samples
----------------------

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 10: Can you add the following for mesh sample supported target change.

* Added support for nRF54L15 in the following samples:

  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_client` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_server` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_ble_peripheral_lbs_coex` sample
  * :ref:`bt_mesh_chat` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_switch` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_silvair_enocean` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_dim` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light` sample
  * :ref:`ble_mesh_dfu_target` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc` sample
  * :ref:`ble_mesh_dfu_distributor` sample

* Added support for nRF54L05 in the following samples:

  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_client` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_server` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_ble_peripheral_lbs_coex` sample
  * :ref:`bt_mesh_chat` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_switch` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_silvair_enocean` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_dim` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light` sample
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc` sample

Author: Done.

   * - LwM2M carrier library
     - `Changelog <LwM2M carrier library changelog for v2.9.0_>`_

Known issues
************

Known issues are only tracked for the latest official release.
See `known issues for nRF Connect SDK v2.9.0`_ for the list of issues valid for the latest release.

Migration notes
***************

See the `Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v2.9.0`_ for the changes required or recommended when migrating your application from |NCS| v2.8.0 to |NCS| v2.9.0.

.. _ncs_release_notes_290_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE, OS, and tool support
=========================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Board support
=============

* Updated various tests and samples to use Zephyr's :ref:`native_sim<zephyr:native_sim>` instead of Zephyr's :ref:`native_posix<zephyr:native_posix>` for :ref:`running_unit_tests`.
  This mirrors the deprecation of ``native_posix`` in Zephyr.
  Support for ``native_posix`` will be removed in Zephyr with the v4.2 release.
  In the |NCS|, it will be removed once Zephyr v4.2 is upmerged to sdk-nrf.

Build and configuration system
==============================

> 

Reviewer 11: Please add an entry per https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/19292

* Fixed the issue in the `nordic-bt-rpc` snippet where an invalid memory map was created for nRF54H20 devices which resulted in runtime failure.

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

|no_changes_yet_note|

Bootloaders and DFU
===================

* Updated the allowed offset for :ref:`doc_fw_info` in the :ref:`bootloader`.
  It can now be placed at offset ``0x600``, however, it cannot be used for any applications with |NSIB| compiled before this change.

Developing with nRF91 Series
============================

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Moved the Thingy:91 and Thingy:91 X guides to new sections, :ref:`thingy91_ug_intro` and :ref:`ug_thingy91x` respectively, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.
```
Please add this changelog entry of PR https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/19202.

Developing with nRF70 Series
============================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Working with nRF54H Series
==========================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Developing with nRF54L Series
=============================

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Added the :ref:`nRF54l_signing_app_with_flpr_payload` page, which includes instructions for building separate applications, merging them, and signing them for MCUboot.
```

    * :ref:`power_profiling`
    * :ref:`peripheral_uart`

* Updated:

  * Configurations of the following Bluetooth samples to make the :ref:`Zephyr Memory Storage (ZMS) <zephyr:zms_api>` the default settings backend for all board targets that use the MRAM technology:

      * :ref:`bluetooth_central_hids`
      * :ref:`peripheral_hids_keyboard`
      * :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse`
      * :ref:`central_and_peripheral_hrs`
      * :ref:`central_bas`
      * :ref:`central_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`central_uart`
      * :ref:`peripheral_bms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cgms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cts_client`
      * :ref:`peripheral_lbs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_mds`
      * :ref:`peripheral_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`power_profiling`
      * :ref:`peripheral_rscs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_status`
      * :ref:`peripheral_uart`
      * :ref:`ble_rpc_host`

    As a result, all :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` configurations of the affected samples were migrated from the NVS settings backend to the ZMS settings backend.
  * Testing steps in the :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse` to provide the build configuration that is compatible with the `Bluetooth Low Energy app`_ testing tool.

>   * :ref:`power_profiling` sample:
> 
>     * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * :ref:`power_profiling` sample, which has now added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.
```

Bluetooth Fast Pair samples
---------------------------

* :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag` sample:

  * Updated the MCUboot bootloader configuration for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54l15dk_nrf54l15` board target to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` Kconfig option that is used to protect the bootloader partition against memory corruption.

Bluetooth Mesh samples
----------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Cellular samples
----------------

* Updated the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_CHECK_CREDENTIALS` Kconfig option to be optional and enabled by default for the following samples:

  * :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_cell_location`
  * :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_device_message`
  * :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_fota`

* :ref:`location_sample` sample:

  * Updated:

    * The Thingy:91 X build to support Wi-Fi by default without overlays.
    * The Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 25 kB.

* :ref:`modem_shell_application` sample:

  * Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 25 kB.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_multi_service` sample:

>   * Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 12 kB for the nRF91 Series DK and 25 kB for the Thingy:91 X.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 12 kB for an nRF91 Series DK and 25 kB for the Thingy:91 X.
```

Cryptography samples
--------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Debug samples
-------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

DECT NR+ samples
----------------

* :ref:`dect_shell_application` sample:

  * Added:

    * The ``dect mac`` command.
      A brief MAC-level sample on top of DECT PHY interface with new commands to create a periodic cluster beacon, scan for it, associate or disassociate a PT/client, and send data to a FT/beacon random access window.
      This is not a full MAC implementation and not fully compliant with DECT NR+ MAC specification (`ETSI TS 103 636-4`_).
    * The ``startup_cmd`` command.
      This command is used to store shell commands to be run sequentially after bootup.
    * Band 4 support for nRF9151 with modem firmware v1.0.2.

  * Updated:

    * The ``dect rssi_scan`` command with busy/possible/free subslot count-based RSSI scan.
    * The ``dect rx`` command to provide the possibility to iterate all channels and to enable RX filter.

Edge Impulse samples
--------------------

> * :ref:`ei_data_forwarder_sample` sample:
> 
>   * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board.
> 
> * :ref:`ei_wrapper_sample` sample:
> 
>   * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board in the following samples:

  * :ref:`ei_data_forwarder_sample`
  * :ref:`ei_wrapper_sample`
```

Enhanced ShockBurst samples
---------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Gazell samples
--------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Keys samples
------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Matter samples
--------------

* Added the :ref:`matter_samples_config` page that documents Kconfig options and snippets used by Matter samples and applications.

* Updated:

  * All Matter samples that support low-power mode to enable the :ref:`lib_ram_pwrdn` feature.
    It is enabled by default for the release configuration of the :ref:`matter_lock_sample`, :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample`, :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample`, and :ref:`matter_window_covering_sample` samples.
  * All Matter samples to enable the ZMS file subsystem in all devices that contain MRAM, such as the nRF54H Series devices.

* Disabled pausing Matter watchdog while CPU is in idle state in all Matter samples.

>   To enable it set the :ref:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_WATCHDOG_PAUSE_IN_SLEEP<CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_WATCHDOG_PAUSE_IN_SLEEP>` Kconfig option to ``y``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  To enable it, set the :ref:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_WATCHDOG_PAUSE_IN_SLEEP<CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_WATCHDOG_PAUSE_IN_SLEEP>` Kconfig option to ``y``.
```

* :ref:`matter_template_sample` sample:

  * Updated the internal configuration for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54l15dk_nrf54l15` target to use the DFU image compression and provide more memory space for the application.

>   * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` target.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
  * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` build target.
```

* :ref:`matter_smoke_co_alarm_sample` sample:

  * Added support for ICD dynamic SIT LIT switching (DSLS).

>   * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` target board.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
  * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` build target.
```

Networking samples
------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

NFC samples
-----------

|no_changes_yet_note|

nRF5340 samples
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Peripheral samples
------------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board targets in the :ref:`radio_test` sample.

PMIC samples
------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Protocol serialization samples
------------------------------

* Updated GPIO pins on nRF54L15 DK used for communication between the client and server over UART.
  One of the previously selected pins was also used to drive an LED, which may have disrupted the UART communication.

SDFW samples
------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Sensor samples
--------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

SUIT samples
------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) samples
---------------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Thread samples
--------------

* Removed support for the ``nrf5340dk/nrf5340/cpuapp/ns`` build target for all samples.

* :ref:`ot_cli_sample` sample:

>   * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board target.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
  * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` build target.
```

* :ref:`ot_coprocessor_sample` sample:

>   * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp`` board targets.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
  * Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp`` build targets.
```

Multiprotocol Service Layer libraries
-------------------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Libraries for networking
------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Libraries for NFC
-----------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

nRF RPC libraries
-----------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf_rpc_dev_info` library for obtaining information about a device connected through the :ref:`nrfxlib:nrf_rpc`.

Other libraries
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Security libraries
------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Shell libraries
---------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Libraries for Zigbee
--------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

sdk-nrfxlib
-----------

See the changelog for each library in the :doc:`nrfxlib documentation <nrfxlib:README>` for additional information.

Scripts
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`script <scripts>`.

* :ref:`nrf_desktop_config_channel_script` Python script:

  * Added support for pure ED25519 signature (used by nRF54L based devices that enable MCUboot hardware cryptography).
    This requires using ``imgtool`` supporting pure ED25519 signature that can be installed from ``sdk-mcuboot`` repository.

>     See the script documentation page for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    See the :ref:`script documentation page <nrf_desktop_config_channel_script>` for details.
```

Author: Not necessary to add the link as it is mentioned already above.

Integrations
============

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`integration <integrations>`.

Google Fast Pair integration
----------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Edge Impulse integration
------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Memfault integration
--------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

AVSystem integration
--------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

nRF Cloud integration
---------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

CoreMark integration
--------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

DULT integration
----------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

MCUboot
=======

The MCUboot fork in |NCS| (``sdk-mcuboot``) contains all commits from the upstream MCUboot repository up to and including ``a4eda30f5b0cfd0cf15512be9dcd559239dbfc91``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

The code for integrating MCUboot into |NCS| is located in the :file:`ncs/nrf/modules/mcuboot` folder.

The following list summarizes both the main changes inherited from upstream MCUboot and the main changes applied to the |NCS| specific additions:

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 2: Anything to add here?

Reviewer 13: Added option which allows to selects the number of KMU key slots (also known as generations) to use when verifying an image. see ``CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KMU_SLOTS MCUboot's Kconfig option``.

Zephyr
======

.. NOTE TO MAINTAINERS: All the Zephyr commits in the below git commands must be handled specially after each upmerge and each nRF Connect SDK release.

The Zephyr fork in |NCS| (``sdk-zephyr``) contains all commits from the upstream Zephyr repository up to and including ``beb733919d8d64a778a11bd5e7d5cbe5ae27b8ee``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

For the list of upstream Zephyr commits (not including cherry-picked commits) incorporated into nRF Connect SDK since the most recent release, run the following command from the :file:`ncs/zephyr` repository (after running ``west update``):

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline beb733919d ^ea02b93eea

For the list of |NCS| specific commits, including commits cherry-picked from upstream, run:

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline manifest-rev ^beb733919d

The current |NCS| main branch is based on revision ``beb733919d`` of Zephyr.

.. note::
   For possible breaking changes and changes between the latest Zephyr release and the current Zephyr version, refer to the :ref:`Zephyr release notes <zephyr_release_notes>`.

Additions specific to |NCS|
---------------------------

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 2: Anything to add here?

      * :ref:`central_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`central_uart`
      * :ref:`peripheral_bms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cgms`
      * :ref:`peripheral_cts_client`
      * :ref:`peripheral_lbs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_mds`
      * :ref:`peripheral_nfc_pairing`
      * :ref:`power_profiling`
      * :ref:`peripheral_rscs`
      * :ref:`peripheral_status`
      * :ref:`peripheral_uart`
      * :ref:`ble_rpc_host`

    As a result, all :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` configurations of the affected samples were migrated from the NVS settings backend to the ZMS settings backend.
  * Testing steps in the :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse` to provide the build configuration that is compatible with the `Bluetooth Low Energy app`_ testing tool.

  * :ref:`power_profiling` sample that now has added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.

Bluetooth Fast Pair samples
---------------------------

* :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag` sample:

  * Updated the MCUboot bootloader configuration for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54l15dk_nrf54l15` board target to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` Kconfig option that is used to protect the bootloader partition against memory corruption.

> 

Reviewer 14: ```
* :ref:`fast_pair_input_device` sample:

  * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.
 ```

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

      * ``flash_and_run``
      * ``heap_memory``
      * ``static_memory``
      * ``multiple_threads``

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

|no_changes_yet_note|

Wi-Fi drivers
-------------

* Added the :ref:`nrf70_wifi_tx_power_calculation` section to the :ref:`nrf70_wifi` page.

Libraries
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`library <libraries>`.

Binary libraries
----------------

* :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library:

  * Updated the :ref:`req_appln_limitations` page to clarify carrier-specific requirements.
    Added overlay files and documentation to :ref:`serial_lte_modem` application and :ref:`lwm2m_carrier` sample to guide in the correct usage of LwM2M carrier library for SoftBank and LG U+.

Bluetooth libraries and services
--------------------------------

* Added the :ref:`rreq_readme` and :ref:`rrsp_readme` libraries.

* :ref:`hogp_readme` library:

  * Updated the :c:func:`bt_hogp_rep_read` function to forward the GATT read error code through the registered user callback.
    This ensures that API user is aware of the error.

> 

Reviewer 14: ```
* :ref:`bt_fast_pair_readme` library:
  * Added support in build system for devices that do not support the :ref:`partition_manager`.
    The :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target is the only example of such device.
```

Reviewer 7: Hi @peknis, please move this entry back to the changelog, it is relevant for 2.9-nRF54H20.

Build and configuration system
==============================

* Fixed the issue in the ``nordic-bt-rpc`` snippet where an invalid memory map was created for nRF54H20 devices, which resulted in a runtime failure.

Bootloaders and DFU
===================

* Updated the allowed offset for :ref:`doc_fw_info` in the :ref:`bootloader`.
  It can now be placed at offset ``0x600``.
  However, you cannot use it for any applications with |NSIB| compiled before this change.

Developing with nRF91 Series
============================

* Moved the Thingy:91 and Thingy:91 X guides to new sections, :ref:`thingy91_ug_intro` and :ref:`ug_thingy91x` respectively, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.

Developing with nRF70 Series
============================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Working with nRF54H Series
==========================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Developing with nRF54L Series
=============================

* Added the :ref:`nRF54l_signing_app_with_flpr_payload` page that includes instructions for building separate applications, merging them, and signing them for MCUboot.

Developing with nRF53 Series
============================

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer: Please add entry for https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/19390:

```suggestion
* Moved the Thingy:53 to a new section, :ref:`ug_thingy53`, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.
```

Author: Done.

* Moved the Thingy:91 and Thingy:91 X guides to new sections, :ref:`thingy91_ug_intro` and :ref:`ug_thingy91x` respectively, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.

Developing with nRF70 Series
============================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Working with nRF54H Series
==========================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Developing with nRF54L Series
=============================

* Added the :ref:`nRF54l_signing_app_with_flpr_payload` page that includes instructions for building separate applications, merging them, and signing them for MCUboot.

Developing with nRF53 Series
============================

* Moved the Thingy:53 to a new section, :ref:`ug_thingy53`, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.

Developing with nRF52 Series
============================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Developing with Front-End Modules
=================================

* Deprecated the explicit use of ``-DSHIELD=nrf21540ek_fwd`` for boards with ``nrf5340/cpuapp`` qualifiers when the nRF21540 EK shield is used.
  The build system uses an appropriate overlay file for each core, relying only on the ``-DSHIELD=nrf21540ek`` parameter.

Developing with PMICs
=====================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Security
========

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 13: * Extended ``west ncs-provision`` command, so different key lifetime policies can be selected.

============================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Working with nRF54H Series
==========================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Developing with nRF54L Series
=============================

* Added the :ref:`nRF54l_signing_app_with_flpr_payload` page that includes instructions for building separate applications, merging them, and signing them for MCUboot.

Developing with nRF53 Series
============================

* Moved the Thingy:53 to a new section, :ref:`ug_thingy53`, under :ref:`ug_app_dev`.

Developing with nRF52 Series
============================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Developing with Front-End Modules
=================================

* Deprecated the explicit use of ``-DSHIELD=nrf21540ek_fwd`` for boards with ``nrf5340/cpuapp`` qualifiers when the nRF21540 EK shield is used.
  The build system uses an appropriate overlay file for each core, relying only on the ``-DSHIELD=nrf21540ek`` parameter.

Developing with PMICs
=====================

|no_changes_yet_note|

Security
========

* Extended the ``west ncs-provision`` command so that different key lifetime policies can be selected.

Protocols
=========

|no_changes_yet_note|

Amazon Sidewalk
---------------

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Added support for the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp`` board target.
```

    * Revert the USB suspended Bluetooth LE connection parameter update when USB cable is disconnected.

  * The :ref:`nrf_desktop_ble_scan` to always use a connection interval of 10 ms for peripherals without Low Latency Packet Mode (LLPM) support if a dongle supports LLPM and more than one Bluetooth LE connection.
    This is required to avoid Bluetooth Link Layer scheduling conflicts that could lead to HID report rate drop.

* Removed imply for partial erase feature of the nRF SoC flash driver (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_FLASH_NRF_PARTIAL_ERASE`) for the USB next stack (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_NEXT <config_desktop_app_options>`).
  The partial erase feature was used as a workaround for device errors that might be reported by the Windows USB host in Device Manager if a USB cable is connected while erasing a secondary image slot in the background.
  The workaround is no longer needed after the nRF UDC driver was improved.

nRF Machine Learning (Edge Impulse)
-----------------------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Serial LTE modem
----------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

> 

Author: This could rather go under Documentation section as it is a totally new (piece of documentation) page.

Applications
============

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`application <applications>`.

Machine learning
----------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Asset Tracker v2
----------------

* Updated the Wi-Fi configurations to reduce the RAM usage by about 25 kB for an nRF91 Series DK and 12 kB for the Thingy:91 X.

Connectivity bridge
-------------------

* Updated the handling of USB CDC ACM baud rate requests to make sure the baud rate is set correctly when the host requests a change.
  This fixes an issue when using GNU screen with the Thingy:91 X.

IPC radio firmware
------------------

|no_changes_yet_note|

Matter bridge
-------------

* Added:

  * Support for the ``UniqueID`` attribute in the Bridged Device Basic Information cluster.
  * Version 2 of bridged device data scheme containing ``UniqueID``.
  * Kconfig options :ref:`CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_PRE_2_7_0 <CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_PRE_2_7_0>` and :ref:`CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_VERSION_1 <CONFIG_BRIDGE_MIGRATE_VERSION_1>` to enable migration from older data schemes.

nRF5340 Audio
-------------

> * Updated the documentation for :ref:`nrf53_audio_app_building` with cross-links and additional information, based on user feedback.

Reviewer 3: Please add:
Added Broadcast Audio Scanning Service (BASS) to the broadcast sink.

Reviewer 3: Mr. changed his mind is here. There was a misunderstanding. Please remove again.

Author: Removed.

* :ref:`fast_pair_input_device` sample:

  * Added support for the :ref:`zephyr:nrf54h20dk_nrf54h20` board target.

Bluetooth Mesh samples
----------------------

* Added:

  * Support for nRF54L15 in the following samples:

    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_client`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_server`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_ble_peripheral_lbs_coex`
    * :ref:`bt_mesh_chat`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_switch`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_silvair_enocean`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_dim`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light`
    * :ref:`ble_mesh_dfu_target`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc`
    * :ref:`ble_mesh_dfu_distributor`

  * Support for nRF54L05 in the following samples:

    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_client`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_server`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_ble_peripheral_lbs_coex`
    * :ref:`bt_mesh_chat`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_switch`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_silvair_enocean`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_dim`
    * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light`

>     * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc`

Reviewer 10: Sorry bu we need to revert those changes for 2.9:
https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/19378#pullrequestreview-2492360120

So no entry for Bluetooth mesh samples.
